Suffolk County Community College
Department Of Natural Sciences

Course Outline


Course: AST101 - Astronomy Of The Solar System (Hybrid)
Section: 500 (CRN: 90526)
Semester: Fall 2018

Professor: John W. Kulkosky
Office: S215
Telephone: 851-6434 
E-Mail: kulkosj@sunysuffolk.edu
Office Hours: To Be Announced


Introduction

Welcome to AST101 - Astronomy of the Solar System hybrid course.  The course is based on sets of lecture notes (as Microsoft Word documents), corresponding slides (as Microsoft PowerPoint files) and a packet of laboratory modules.  The lecture notes and slides can be accessed through the course website. The address is: http://ast101.site.  Within the lectures notes you will observe numbers, represented as red-colored superscripts, which correspond to numbered slides of images and diagrams within the PowerPoint presentations.  Print the notes, and as you read the notes, refer to the slides.  Remember, a picture is worth a thousand words, so look at the slides carefully, especially the diagrams.  To access the PowerPoint presentations, either left-click on the word -Slides- to open the file or right-click and then choose -Save Target As-- to download onto your computer.  Because the PowerPoint files are rather large, a high-speed Internet connection is preferred.  If you do not have the PowerPoint program, you can download the viewer through a hyperlink on the website.  


Resources

* AST101 - Astronomy Of The Solar System Internet Site
http://ast101.site
John W. Kulkosky

* Astronomy Through Practical Investigations
George Lomaga, Wayne Smiley and Robert Warasila 

* Number-2 Pencil


Course Objectives

* Outline the principal developments in astronomy to the present state of planetary research.

* Describe the fundamental aspects of coordinates and motions of celestial objects - the Sun, Moon, planets and stars; including configurations and/or phase determinations.  (The star finder, horizon system, celestial sphere diagrams and planetarium are used to solve problems to demonstrate proficiency in this objective.)




* Describe the properties and individual characteristics of the planets and their satellites, asteroids, comets and meteoroids-meteors-meteorites of the solar system; including the basic concepts of comparative planetology in regard to understanding the differences and similarities among these objects.

* Describe the current models of the origin and evolution of the solar system, including the observations that support these models.

* Identify the prominent constellations and stars of the night sky.  (The planetarium and evening observations are used to demonstrate proficiency in this objective.)

Student Responsibilities

* Attend all class meetings.  Be on time to class.

* Complete all assigned laboratory modules.

* Take all examinations.

* Participate in class discussions and activities.  Class activities may include an evening observation.

* Ask questions and seek help when needed.


Grading Procedures

* Six examinations will be given based on lecture notes and laboratory modules. All examinations are weighted equally.  The student-s lowest examination grade will be dropped.  The student-s final grade will be the average of five of the six examinations given.

* Extra credit may be attained by writing a five-page (single-spaced) research paper on a specific topic of planetary astronomy.  The paper is worth up to three points on the student-s final grade.  The topic for the paper must be approved by the instructor.


Material Covered On Each Examination

Examination One - Lecture Notes: The Science of Astronomy and Celestial Observations;
Laboratory Modules: Investigations No. 15 and No. 20

Examination Two - Lecture Notes: The Development of Astronomy;
Laboratory Modules: Investigations No. 9, No. 14 and No. 16

Examination Three - Lecture Notes: The Origin of the Solar System, The Earth and The Moon;
Readings: Investigation No. 17M (the section of the introduction concerning the origin of the solar system); Laboratory Modules: Investigation No. 10

Examination Four - Lecture Notes: Mercury, Venus and Mars;
Laboratory Modules: Investigations No. 17M, No. 17V and No. 18

Examination Five - Lecture Notes: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune;
Laboratory Modules: Investigation No. 19

Examination Six - Lecture Notes: Pluto, Asteroids, Comets and Meteoroids-Meteors-Meteorites;
Laboratory Modules: Investigations No. 19, No. 3 and No. 4

Course Schedule

09/04: The Science of Astronomy and Celestial Observations

09/11: Investigation No. 15

09/18: Investigation No. 20

09/25: Examination One
Investigation No. 9


10/02: Investigation No. 14

10/16: Examination Two (Part One)
The Development of Astronomy


10/23: Examination Two (Part Two)
The Earth 


10/30: The Moon and Mercury
Investigations No. 10 and No. 17M


11/06: Investigation No. 16
The Origin of the Solar System


11/13: Examination Three
Venus and Mars
Investigations No. 17V and No. 18


11/20: Jupiter and Saturn
Investigation No. 19


11/27: Examination Four
Uranus and Neptune
Investigation No. 19 (continued)


12/04: Examination Five
Pluto and Asteroids 
Investigations No. 19 (continued) and No. 3


12/11: Comets and Meteoroids-Meteors-Meteorites
Investigation No. 4


12/18: Examination Six
































